ACT III SCENE I 	A heath.
 	Storm still. Enter KENT and a Gentleman, meeting	 
KENT 	Who's there, besides foul weather?	 
Gentleman 	One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
KENT 	I know you. Where's the king?	 
Gentleman 	Contending with the fretful element:	 5
 	Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea,	 
 	Or swell the curled water 'bove the main,	 
 	That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,	 
 	Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,	 
 	Catch in their fury, and make nothing of;	 10
 	Strives in his little world of man to out-scorn	 
 	The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.	 
 	This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,	 
 	The lion and the belly-pinched wolf	 
 	Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,	 15
 	And bids what will take all.	 
KENT 	But who is with him?	 
Gentleman 	None but the fool; who labours to out-jest	 
 	His heart-struck injuries.	 
KENT 	Sir, I do know you;	 20
 	And dare, upon the warrant of my note,	 
 	Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,	 
 	Although as yet the face of it be cover'd	 
 	With mutual cunning, 'twixt Albany and Cornwall;	 
 	Who have--as who have not, that their great stars	 25
 	Throned and set high?--servants, who seem no less,	 
 	Which are to France the spies and speculations	 
 	Intelligent of our state; what hath been seen,	 
 	Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,	 
 	Or the hard rein which both of them have borne	 30
 	Against the old kind king; or something deeper,	 
 	Whereof perchance these are but furnishings;	 
 	But, true it is, from France there comes a power	 
 	Into this scatter'd kingdom; who already,	 
 	Wise in our negligence, have secret feet	 35
 	In some of our best ports, and are at point	 
 	To show their open banner. Now to you:	 
 	If on my credit you dare build so far	 
 	To make your speed to Dover, you shall find	 
 	Some that will thank you, making just report	 40
 	Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow	 
 	The king hath cause to plain.	 
 	I am a gentleman of blood and breeding;	 
 	And, from some knowledge and assurance, offer	 
 	This office to you.	 45
Gentleman 	I will talk further with you.	 
KENT 	No, do not.	 
 	For confirmation that I am much more	 
 	Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take	 
 	What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,--	 50
 	As fear not but you shall,--show her this ring;	 
 	And she will tell you who your fellow is	 
 	That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!	 
 	I will go seek the king.	 
Gentleman 	Give me your hand: have you no more to say?	 55
KENT 	Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet;	 
 	That, when we have found the king,--in which your pain	 
 	That way, I'll this,--he that first lights on him	 
 	Holla the other.	 
 	Exeunt severally

ACT III SCENE II 	Another part of the heath. Storm still.	 
 	Enter KING LEAR and Fool	 
KING LEAR 	Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow!	 
 	You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout	 
 	Till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks!	 
 	You sulphurous and thought-executing fires,	 5
 	Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,	 
 	Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,	 
 	Smite flat the thick rotundity o' the world!	 
 	Crack nature's moulds, an germens spill at once,	 
 	That make ingrateful man!	 10
Fool 	O nuncle, court holy-water in a dry	 
 	house is better than this rain-water out o' door.	 
 	Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters' blessing:	 
 	here's a night pities neither wise man nor fool.	 
KING LEAR 	Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!	 15
 	Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire, are my daughters:	 
 	I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness;	 
 	I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children,	 
 	You owe me no subscription: then let fall	 
 	Your horrible pleasure: here I stand, your slave,	 20
 	A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man:	 
 	But yet I call you servile ministers,	 
 	That have with two pernicious daughters join'd	 
 	Your high engender'd battles 'gainst a head	 
 	So old and white as this. O! O! 'tis foul!	 25
Fool 	He that has a house to put's head in has a good	 
 	head-piece.	 
 	The cod-piece that will house	 
 	Before the head has any,	 
 	The head and he shall louse;	 30
 	So beggars marry many.	 
 	The man that makes his toe	 
 	What he his heart should make	 
 	Shall of a corn cry woe,	 
 	And turn his sleep to wake.	 35
 	For there was never yet fair woman but she made	 
 	mouths in a glass.	 
KING LEAR 	No, I will be the pattern of all patience;	 
 	I will say nothing.	 
 	Enter KENT	 
KENT 	Who's there?	 40
Fool 	Marry, here's grace and a cod-piece; that's a wise	 
 	man and a fool.	 
KENT 	Alas, sir, are you here? things that love night	 
 	Love not such nights as these; the wrathful skies	 
 	Gallow the very wanderers of the dark,	 45
 	And make them keep their caves: since I was man,	 
 	Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,	 
 	Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never	 
 	Remember to have heard: man's nature cannot carry	 
 	The affliction nor the fear.	 50
KING LEAR 	Let the great gods,	 
 	That keep this dreadful pother o'er our heads,	 
 	Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,	 
 	That hast within thee undivulged crimes,	 
 	Unwhipp'd of justice: hide thee, thou bloody hand;	 55
 	Thou perjured, and thou simular man of virtue	 
 	That art incestuous: caitiff, to pieces shake,	 
 	That under covert and convenient seeming	 
 	Hast practised on man's life: close pent-up guilts,	 
 	Rive your concealing continents, and cry	 60
 	These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man	 
 	More sinn'd against than sinning.	 
KENT 	Alack, bare-headed!	 
 	Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;	 
 	Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest:	 65
 	Repose you there; while I to this hard house--	 
 	More harder than the stones whereof 'tis raised;	 
 	Which even but now, demanding after you,	 
 	Denied me to come in--return, and force	 
 	Their scanted courtesy.	 70
KING LEAR 	My wits begin to turn.	 
 	Come on, my boy: how dost, my boy? art cold?	 
 	I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?	 
 	The art of our necessities is strange,	 
 	That can make vile things precious. Come,	 75
 	your hovel.	 
 	Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart	 
 	That's sorry yet for thee.	 
Fool 	Singing	 
 	He that has and a little tiny wit--	 
 	With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,--	 80
 	Must make content with his fortunes fit,	 
 	For the rain it raineth every day.	 
KING LEAR 	True, my good boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.	 
 	Exeunt KING LEAR and KENT	 
Fool 	This is a brave night to cool a courtezan.	 
 	I'll speak a prophecy ere I go:	 85
 	When priests are more in word than matter;	 
 	When brewers mar their malt with water;	 
 	When nobles are their tailors' tutors;	 
 	No heretics burn'd, but wenches' suitors;	 
 	When every case in law is right;	 90
 	No squire in debt, nor no poor knight;	 
 	When slanders do not live in tongues;	 
 	Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;	 
 	When usurers tell their gold i' the field;	 
 	And bawds and whores do churches build;	 95
 	Then shall the realm of Albion	 
 	Come to great confusion:	 
 	Then comes the time, who lives to see't,	 
 	That going shall be used with feet.	 
 	This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before his time.	 100
 	Exit

ACT III SCENE III 	Gloucester's castle.	 
 	Enter GLOUCESTER and EDMUND	 
GLOUCESTER 	Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural	 
 	dealing. When I desire their leave that I might	 
 	pity him, they took from me the use of mine own	 
 	house; charged me, on pain of their perpetual	 5
 	displeasure, neither to speak of him, entreat for	 
 	him, nor any way sustain him.	 
EDMUND 	Most savage and unnatural!	 
GLOUCESTER 	Go to; say you nothing. There's a division betwixt	 
 	the dukes; and a worse matter than that: I have	 10
 	received a letter this night; 'tis dangerous to be	 
 	spoken; I have locked the letter in my closet:	 
 	these injuries the king now bears will be revenged	 
 	home; there's part of a power already footed: we	 
 	must incline to the king. I will seek him, and	 15
 	privily relieve him: go you and maintain talk with	 
 	the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived:	 
 	if he ask for me. I am ill, and gone to bed.	 
 	Though I die for it, as no less is threatened me,	 
 	the king my old master must be relieved. There is	 20
 	some strange thing toward, Edmund; pray you, be careful.	 
 	Exit	 
EDMUND 	This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke	 
 	Instantly know; and of that letter too:	 
 	This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me	 
 	That which my father loses; no less than all:	 25
 	The younger rises when the old doth fall.	 
 	Exit	 

ACT III SCENE IV 	The heath. Before a hovel.
 	Enter KING LEAR, KENT, and Fool	 
KENT 	Here is the place, my lord; good my lord, enter:	 
 	The tyranny of the open night's too rough	 
 	For nature to endure.	 
 	Storm still	 
KING LEAR 	Let me alone.	 5
KENT 	Good my lord, enter here.	 
KING LEAR 	Wilt break my heart?	 
KENT 	I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.	 
KING LEAR 	Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm	 
 	Invades us to the skin: so 'tis to thee;	 10
 	But where the greater malady is fix'd,	 
 	The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'ldst shun a bear;	 
 	But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,	 
 	Thou'ldst meet the bear i' the mouth. When the	 
 	mind's free,	 15
 	The body's delicate: the tempest in my mind	 
 	Doth from my senses take all feeling else	 
 	Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!	 
 	Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand	 
 	For lifting food to't? But I will punish home:	 20
 	No, I will weep no more. In such a night	 
 	To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure.	 
 	In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!	 
 	Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all,--	 
 	O, that way madness lies; let me shun that;	 25
 	No more of that.	 
KENT 	Good my lord, enter here.	 
KING LEAR 	Prithee, go in thyself: seek thine own ease:	 
 	This tempest will not give me leave to ponder	 
 	On things would hurt me more. But I'll go in.	 30
 	To the Fool	 
 	In, boy; go first. You houseless poverty,--	 
 	Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.	 
 	Fool goes in	 
 	Poor naked wretches, whereso'er you are,	 
 	That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,	 
 	How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,	 35
 	Your loop'd and window'd raggedness, defend you	 
 	From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en	 
 	Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp;	 
 	Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,	 
 	That thou mayst shake the superflux to them,	 40
 	And show the heavens more just.	 
EDGAR 	Within	 
 	The Fool runs out from the hovel	 
Fool 	Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit	 
 	Help me, help me!	 
KENT 	Give me thy hand. Who's there?	 
Fool 	A spirit, a spirit: he says his name's poor Tom.	 45
KENT 	What art thou that dost grumble there i' the straw?	 
 	Come forth.	 
 	Enter EDGAR disguised as a mad man	 
EDGAR 	Away! the foul fiend follows me!	 
 	Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.	 
 	Hum! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.	 50
KING LEAR 	Hast thou given all to thy two daughters?	 
 	And art thou come to this?	 
EDGAR 	Who gives any thing to poor Tom? whom the foul	 
 	fiend hath led through fire and through flame, and	 
 	through ford and whirlipool e'er bog and quagmire;	 55
 	that hath laid knives under his pillow, and halters	 
 	in his pew; set ratsbane by his porridge; made film	 
 	proud of heart, to ride on a bay trotting-horse over	 
 	four-inched bridges, to course his own shadow for a	 
 	traitor. Bless thy five wits! Tom's a-cold,--O, do	 60
 	de, do de, do de. Bless thee from whirlwinds,	 
 	star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some	 
 	charity, whom the foul fiend vexes: there could I	 
 	have him now,--and there,--and there again, and there.	 
 	Storm still	 
KING LEAR 	What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?	 65
 	Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give them all?	 
Fool 	Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.	 
KING LEAR 	Now, all the plagues that in the pendulous air	 
 	Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!	 
KENT 	He hath no daughters, sir.	 70
KING LEAR 	Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature	 
 	To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.	 
 	Is it the fashion, that discarded fathers	 
 	Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?	 
 	Judicious punishment! 'twas this flesh begot	 75
 	Those pelican daughters.	 
EDGAR 	Pillicock sat on Pillicock-hill:	 
 	Halloo, halloo, loo, loo!	 
Fool 	This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.	 
EDGAR 	Take heed o' the foul fiend: obey thy parents;	 80
 	keep thy word justly; swear not; commit not with	 
 	man's sworn spouse; set not thy sweet heart on proud	 
 	array. Tom's a-cold.	 
KING LEAR 	What hast thou been?	 
EDGAR 	A serving-man, proud in heart and mind; that curled	 85
 	my hair; wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of	 
 	my mistress' heart, and did the act of darkness with	 
 	her; swore as many oaths as I spake words, and	 
 	broke them in the sweet face of heaven: one that	 
 	slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it:	 90
 	wine loved I deeply, dice dearly: and in woman	 
 	out-paramoured the Turk: false of heart, light of	 
 	ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth,	 
 	wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey.	 
 	Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of	 95
 	silks betray thy poor heart to woman: keep thy foot	 
 	out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy pen	 
 	from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend.	 
 	Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind:	 
 	Says suum, mun, ha, no, nonny.	 100
 	Dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa! let him trot by.	 
 	Storm still	 
KING LEAR 	Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer	 
 	with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.	 
 	Is man no more than this? Consider him well. Thou	 
 	owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep	 105
 	no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! here's three on	 
 	's are sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself:	 
 	unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor bare,	 
 	forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings!	 
 	come unbutton here.	 110
 	Tearing off his clothes	 
Fool 	Prithee, nuncle, be contented; 'tis a naughty night	 
 	to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were	 
 	like an old lecher's heart; a small spark, all the	 
 	rest on's body cold. Look, here comes a walking fire.	 
 	Enter GLOUCESTER, with a torch	 
EDGAR 	This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet: he begins	 115
 	at curfew, and walks till the first cock; he gives	 
 	the web and the pin, squints the eye, and makes the	 
 	hare-lip; mildews the white wheat, and hurts the	 
 	poor creature of earth.	 
 	S. Withold footed thrice the old;	 120
 	He met the night-mare, and her nine-fold;	 
 	Bid her alight,	 
 	And her troth plight,	 
 	And, aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!	 
KENT 	How fares your grace?	 125
KING LEAR 	What's he?	 
KENT 	Who's there? What is't you seek?	 
GLOUCESTER 	What are you there? Your names?	 
EDGAR 	Poor Tom; that eats the swimming frog, the toad,	 
 	the tadpole, the wall-newt and the water; that in	 130
 	the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages,	 
 	eats cow-dung for sallets; swallows the old rat and	 
 	the ditch-dog; drinks the green mantle of the	 
 	standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to	 
 	tithing, and stock- punished, and imprisoned; who	 135
 	hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his	 
 	body, horse to ride, and weapon to wear;	 
 	But mice and rats, and such small deer,	 
 	Have been Tom's food for seven long year.	 
 	Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin; peace, thou fiend!	 140
GLOUCESTER 	What, hath your grace no better company?	 
EDGAR 	The prince of darkness is a gentleman:	 
 	Modo he's call'd, and Mahu.	 
GLOUCESTER 	Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,	 
 	That it doth hate what gets it.	 145
EDGAR 	Poor Tom's a-cold.	 
GLOUCESTER 	Go in with me: my duty cannot suffer	 
 	To obey in all your daughters' hard commands:	 
 	Though their injunction be to bar my doors,	 
 	And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,	 150
 	Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,	 
 	And bring you where both fire and food is ready.	 
KING LEAR 	First let me talk with this philosopher.	 
 	What is the cause of thunder?	 
KENT 	Good my lord, take his offer; go into the house.	 155
KING LEAR 	I'll talk a word with this same learned Theban.	 
 	What is your study?	 
EDGAR 	How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.	 
KING LEAR 	Let me ask you one word in private.	 
KENT 	Importune him once more to go, my lord;	 160
 	His wits begin to unsettle.	 
GLOUCESTER 	Canst thou blame him?	 
 	Storm still	 
 	His daughters seek his death: ah, that good Kent!	 
 	He said it would be thus, poor banish'd man!	 
 	Thou say'st the king grows mad; I'll tell thee, friend,	 165
 	I am almost mad myself: I had a son,	 
 	Now outlaw'd from my blood; he sought my life,	 
 	But lately, very late: I loved him, friend;	 
 	No father his son dearer: truth to tell thee,	 
 	The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night's this!	 170
 	I do beseech your grace,--	 
KING LEAR 	O, cry your mercy, sir.	 
 	Noble philosopher, your company.	 
EDGAR 	Tom's a-cold.	 
GLOUCESTER 	In, fellow, there, into the hovel: keep thee warm.	 175
KING LEAR 	Come let's in all.	 
KENT 	This way, my lord.	 
KING LEAR 	With him;	 
 	I will keep still with my philosopher.	 
KENT 	Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.	 180
GLOUCESTER 	Take him you on.	 
KENT 	Sirrah, come on; go along with us.	 
KING LEAR 	Come, good Athenian.	 
GLOUCESTER 	No words, no words: hush.	 
EDGAR 	Child Rowland to the dark tower came,	 185
 	His word was still,--Fie, foh, and fum,	 
 	I smell the blood of a British man.	 
 	Exeunt	 

ACT III SCENE V 	Gloucester's castle.	 
 	Enter CORNWALL and EDMUND	 
CORNWALL 	I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.	 
EDMUND 	How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus	 
 	gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think	 
 	of.	 5
CORNWALL 	I now perceive, it was not altogether your	 
 	brother's evil disposition made him seek his death;	 
 	but a provoking merit, set a-work by a reprovable	 
 	badness in himself.	 
EDMUND 	How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to	 10
 	be just! This is the letter he spoke of, which	 
 	approves him an intelligent party to the advantages	 
 	of France: O heavens! that this treason were not,	 
 	or not I the detector!	 
CORNWALL 	o with me to the duchess.	 15
EDMUND 	If the matter of this paper be certain, you have	 
 	mighty business in hand.	 
CORNWALL 	True or false, it hath made thee earl of	 
 	Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he	 
 	may be ready for our apprehension.	 20
EDMUND 	Aside	 
 	stuff his suspicion more fully.--I will persevere in	 
 	my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore	 
 	between that and my blood.	 
CORNWALL 	I will lay trust upon thee; and thou shalt find a	 
 	dearer father in my love.	 25
 	Exeunt	 

ACT III SCENE VI 	A chamber in a farmhouse adjoining the castle.	 
 	Enter GLOUCESTER, KING LEAR, KENT, Fool, and EDGAR	 
GLOUCESTER 	Here is better than the open air; take it	 
 	thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what	 
 	addition I can: I will not be long from you.	 
KENT 	All the power of his wits have given way to his	 5
 	impatience: the gods reward your kindness!	 
 	Exit GLOUCESTER	 
EDGAR 	Frateretto calls me; and tells me	 
 	Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness.	 
 	Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.	 
Fool 	Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a	 10
 	gentleman or a yeoman?	 
KING LEAR 	A king, a king!	 
Fool 	No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son;	 
 	for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman	 
 	before him.	 15
KING LEAR 	To have a thousand with red burning spits	 
 	Come hissing in upon 'em,--	 
EDGAR 	The foul fiend bites my back.	 
Fool 	He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a	 
 	horse's health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.	 20
KING LEAR 	It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.	 
 	To EDGAR	 
 	Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer;	 
 	To the Fool	 
 	Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she foxes!	 
EDGAR 	Look, where he stands and glares!	 
 	Wantest thou eyes at trial, madam?	 25
 	Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me,--	 
Fool 	Her boat hath a leak,	 
 	And she must not speak	 
 	Why she dares not come over to thee.	 
EDGAR 	The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a	 30
 	nightingale. Hopdance cries in Tom's belly for two	 
 	white herring. Croak not, black angel; I have no	 
 	food for thee.	 
KENT 	How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed:	 
 	Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?	 35
KING LEAR 	I'll see their trial first. Bring in the evidence.	 
 	To EDGAR	 
 	Thou robed man of justice, take thy place;	 
 	To the Fool	 
 	And thou, his yoke-fellow of equity,	 
 	Bench by his side:	 
 	To KENT	 
 	you are o' the commission,	 40
 	Sit you too.	 
EDGAR 	Let us deal justly.	 
 	Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?	 
 	Thy sheep be in the corn;	 
 	And for one blast of thy minikin mouth,	 45
 	Thy sheep shall take no harm.	 
 	Pur! the cat is gray.	 
KING LEAR 	Arraign her first; 'tis Goneril. I here take my	 
 	oath before this honourable assembly, she kicked the	 
 	poor king her father.	 50
Fool 	Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?	 
KING LEAR 	She cannot deny it.	 
Fool 	Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.	 
KING LEAR 	And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim	 
 	What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!	 55
 	Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place!	 
 	False justicer, why hast thou let her 'scape?	 
EDGAR 	Bless thy five wits!	 
KENT 	O pity! Sir, where is the patience now,	 
 	That thou so oft have boasted to retain?	 60
EDGAR 	Aside	 
 	They'll mar my counterfeiting.	 
KING LEAR 	The little dogs and all, Tray, Blanch, and	 
 	Sweet-heart, see, they bark at me.	 
EDGAR 	Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!	 
 	Be thy mouth or black or white,	 65
 	Tooth that poisons if it bite;	 
 	Mastiff, grey-hound, mongrel grim,	 
 	Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,	 
 	Or bobtail tike or trundle-tail,	 
 	Tom will make them weep and wail:	 70
 	For, with throwing thus my head,	 
 	Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.	 
 	Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and	 
 	fairs and market-towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.	 
KING LEAR 	Then let them anatomize Regan; see what breeds	 75
 	about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that	 
 	makes these hard hearts?	 
 	To EDGAR	 
 	You, sir, I entertain for one of my hundred; only I	 
 	do not like the fashion of your garments: you will	 
 	say they are Persian attire: but let them be changed.	 80
KENT 	Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.	 
KING LEAR 	Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains:	 
 	so, so, so. We'll go to supper i' he morning. So, so, so.	 
Fool 	And I'll go to bed at noon.	 
 	Re-enter GLOUCESTER	 
GLOUCESTER 	Come hither, friend: where is the king my master?	 85
KENT 	Here, sir; but trouble him not, his wits are gone.	 
GLOUCESTER 	Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms;	 
 	I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him:	 
 	There is a litter ready; lay him in 't,	 
 	And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet	 90
 	Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master:	 
 	If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,	 
 	With thine, and all that offer to defend him,	 
 	Stand in assured loss: take up, take up;	 
 	And follow me, that will to some provision	 95
 	Give thee quick conduct.	 
KENT 	Oppressed nature sleeps:	 
 	This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,	 
 	Which, if convenience will not allow,	 
 	Stand in hard cure.	 100
 	To the Fool	 
 	Come, help to bear thy master;	 
 	Thou must not stay behind.	 
GLOUCESTER 	Come, come, away.	 
 	Exeunt all but EDGAR	 
EDGAR 	When we our betters see bearing our woes,	 
 	We scarcely think our miseries our foes.	 105
 	Who alone suffers suffers most i' the mind,	 
 	Leaving free things and happy shows behind:	 
 	But then the mind much sufferance doth o'er skip,	 
 	When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.	 
 	How light and portable my pain seems now,	 110
 	When that which makes me bend makes the king bow,	 
 	He childed as I father'd! Tom, away!	 
 	Mark the high noises; and thyself bewray,	 
 	When false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,	 
 	In thy just proof, repeals and reconciles thee.	 115
 	What will hap more to-night, safe 'scape the king!	 
 	Lurk, lurk.	 
 	Exit	 


ACT III SCENE VII 	Gloucester's castle.	 
 	Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GONERIL, EDMUND, and Servants	 
CORNWALL 	Post speedily to my lord your husband; show him	 
 	this letter: the army of France is landed. Seek	 
 	out the villain Gloucester.	 
 	Exeunt some of the Servants	 
REGAN 	Hang him instantly.	 5
GONERIL 	Pluck out his eyes.	 
CORNWALL 	Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our	 
 	sister company: the revenges we are bound to take	 
 	upon your traitorous father are not fit for your	 
 	beholding. Advise the duke, where you are going, to	 10
 	a most festinate preparation: we are bound to the	 
 	like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent	 
 	betwixt us. Farewell, dear sister: farewell, my	 
 	lord of Gloucester.	 
 	Enter OSWALD	 
 	How now! where's the king?	 15
OSWALD 	My lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence:	 
 	Some five or six and thirty of his knights,	 
 	Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;	 
 	Who, with some other of the lords dependants,	 
 	Are gone with him towards Dover; where they boast	 20
 	To have well-armed friends.	 
CORNWALL 	Get horses for your mistress.	 
GONERIL 	Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.	 
CORNWALL 	Edmund, farewell.	 
 	Exeunt GONERIL, EDMUND, and OSWALD	 
 	Go seek the traitor Gloucester,	 25
 	Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.	 
 	Exeunt other Servants	 
 	Though well we may not pass upon his life	 
 	Without the form of justice, yet our power	 
 	Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men	 
 	May blame, but not control. Who's there? the traitor?	 30
 	Enter GLOUCESTER, brought in by two or three	 
REGAN 	Ingrateful fox! 'tis he.	 
CORNWALL 	Bind fast his corky arms.	 
GLOUCESTER 	What mean your graces? Good my friends, consider	 
 	You are my guests: do me no foul play, friends.	 
CORNWALL 	Bind him, I say.	 35
 	Servants bind him	 
REGAN 	Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!	 
GLOUCESTER 	Unmerciful lady as you are, I'm none.	 
CORNWALL 	To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find--	 
 	REGAN plucks his beard	 
GLOUCESTER 	By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done	 
 	To pluck me by the beard.	 40
REGAN 	So white, and such a traitor!	 
GLOUCESTER 	Naughty lady,	 
 	These hairs, which thou dost ravish from my chin,	 
 	Will quicken, and accuse thee: I am your host:	 
 	With robbers' hands my hospitable favours	 45
 	You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?	 
CORNWALL 	Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?	 
REGAN 	Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.	 
CORNWALL 	And what confederacy have you with the traitors	 
 	Late footed in the kingdom?	 50
REGAN 	To whose hands have you sent the lunatic king? Speak.	 
GLOUCESTER 	I have a letter guessingly set down,	 
 	Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,	 
 	And not from one opposed.	 
CORNWALL 	Cunning.	 55
REGAN 	And false.	 
CORNWALL 	Where hast thou sent the king?	 
GLOUCESTER 	To Dover.	 
REGAN 	Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril--	 
CORNWALL 	Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.	 60
GLOUCESTER 	I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.	 
REGAN 	Wherefore to Dover, sir?	 
GLOUCESTER 	Because I would not see thy cruel nails	 
 	Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister	 
 	In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.	 65
 	The sea, with such a storm as his bare head	 
 	In hell-black night endured, would have buoy'd up,	 
 	And quench'd the stelled fires:	 
 	Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.	 
 	If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,	 70
 	Thou shouldst have said 'Good porter, turn the key,'	 
 	All cruels else subscribed: but I shall see	 
 	The winged vengeance overtake such children.	 
CORNWALL 	See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.	 
 	Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.	 75
GLOUCESTER 	He that will think to live till he be old,	 
 	Give me some help! O cruel! O you gods!	 
REGAN 	One side will mock another; the other too.	 
CORNWALL 	If you see vengeance,--	 
First Servant 	Hold your hand, my lord:	 80
 	I have served you ever since I was a child;	 
 	But better service have I never done you	 
 	Than now to bid you hold.	 
REGAN 	How now, you dog!	 
First Servant 	If you did wear a beard upon your chin,	 85
 	I'd shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?	 
CORNWALL 	My villain!	 
 	They draw and fight	 
First Servant 	Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.	 
REGAN 	Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus!	 
 	Takes a sword, and runs at him behind	 
First Servant 	O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left	 90
 	To see some mischief on him. O!	 
 	Dies	 
CORNWALL 	Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!	 
 	Where is thy lustre now?	 
GLOUCESTER 	All dark and comfortless. Where's my son Edmund?	 
 	Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature,	 95
 	To quit this horrid act.	 
REGAN 	Out, treacherous villain!	 
 	Thou call'st on him that hates thee: it was he	 
 	That made the overture of thy treasons to us;	 
 	Who is too good to pity thee.	 100
GLOUCESTER 	O my follies! then Edgar was abused.	 
 	Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!	 
REGAN 	Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell	 
 	His way to Dover.	 
 	Exit one with GLOUCESTER	 
 	How is't, my lord? how look you?	 105
CORNWALL 	I have received a hurt: follow me, lady.	 
 	Turn out that eyeless villain; throw this slave	 
 	Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace:	 
 	Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.	 
 	Exit CORNWALL, led by REGAN	 
Second Servant 	I'll never care what wickedness I do,	 110
 	If this man come to good.	 
Third Servant 	If she live long,	 
 	And in the end meet the old course of death,	 
 	Women will all turn monsters.	 
Second Servant 	Let's follow the old earl, and get the Bedlam	 115
 	To lead him where he would: his roguish madness	 
 	Allows itself to any thing.	 
Third Servant 	Go thou: I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs	 
 	To apply to his bleeding face. Now, heaven help him!	 
 	Exeunt severally	 
